10th December'25
0:12 AM

$Status:$  
$tags:$ 

# Version Control System
A version control system (VCS) is a program or set of programs that tracks changes to a collection of files. One goal of a VCS is to easily recall earlier versions of individual files or of the entire project. Another goal is to allow several team members to work on a project, even on the same files, at the same time without affecting each other's work.

Another name for a VCS is a software configuration management (SCM) system. The two terms often are used interchangeably—in fact, Git's official documentation is located at [git-scm.com](https://git-scm.com/). Technically, version control is just one of the practices involved in SCM. A VCS can be used for projects other than software, including books and online tutorials.

# What can we do with VCS?
With a VCS, you can:

-  See all the changes made to your project, when the changes were made,  and who made them.
-  Include a message with each change to explain the reasoning behind it.
-  Retrieve past versions of the entire project or of individual files.
-  Create _branches_, where changes can be made experimentally. This feature allows several different sets of changes (for example, features or bug fixes) to be worked on at the same time, possibly by different people, without affecting the main branch. Later, you can merge the changes you want to keep back into the main branch.
-  Attach a tag to a version—for example, to mark a new release.

Git is a fast, versatile, highly scalable, free, open-source VCS. Its primary author is [[Linus Torvalds]], the creator of Linux.

# Distributed Version Control

Earlier instances of VCSes, including CVS, Subversion (SVN), and Perforce, used a centralized server to store a project's history. This centralization meant that the one server was also potentially a single point of failure.

Git is _distributed_, which means that a project's complete history is stored both on the client _and_ on the server. You can edit files without a network connection, check them in locally, and sync with the server when a connection becomes available. If a server goes down, you still have a local copy of the project. Technically, you don't even have to have a server. Changes could be passed around in e-mail or shared by using removable media, but no one uses Git this way in practice.
# References
[[github-foundations-exam-study-guide__1_.pdf]]
[[progit.pdf]]
[Geek for Geeks](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/git/version-control-systems/)

# LINKS
[[3. Git Terminology]]